Add new guide how to create a plugin - Closes #888 (#894)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/guides/app-development/plugin.adoc

= Creating a custom plugin
Mona Bärenfänger <mona@lightcurve.io>
// Settings
:toc:
:sectnums:
// Project URLS
:url_architecture: architecture/index.adoc#configuration
:url_guides_modules: guides/app-development/module.adoc
:url_guides_setup: guides/app-development/setup.adoc
:url_guides_asset: guides/app-development/transaction-asset.adoc
:url_modules_dpos: dpos-module.adoc
:url_rpc_endpoints: rpc-endpoints.adoc
:url_tutorials_hello: tutorials/hello-world.adoc

This guide explains step-by-step, how to create a custom plugin for a blockchain application built with the Lisk SDK.

.Prerequisites
[NOTE]
====

> To follow this guide, the following is assumed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this guide, it is assumed that the following criteria have been met:
```

}

module.exports = MyPlugin;
----

== Setting the plugin alias

The alias of the plugin is used to identify the plugin within the application.

Define a getter `alias()`, which returns the plugin alias as string.

[source,js]
----
const { BasePlugin } = require('lisk-sdk');

class MyPlugin extends BasePlugin {
  static get alias() {
    return "MyPlugin";
  }
}

module.exports = MyPlugin;
----

== Defining the plugin meta information

Next, define a getter `info()` to return the meta information about the plugin as an object.

In this example, we parse the package information from `package.json` and return author, version and name of the package.

[source,js]
----
const { BasePlugin } = require('lisk-sdk');
const pJSON = require('../package.json');

class MyPlugin extends BasePlugin {
  static get alias() {
    return "MyPlugin";
  }

  static get info() {
    return {
      author: pJSON.author,
      version: pJSON.version,
      name: pJSON.name,
    };
  }
}

module.exports = MyPlugin;
----

== Defining the plugin configuration

A plugin can be configured by setting the related properties in the application xref:{url_architecture}[configuration].

> What properties should bbe added to the application config is defined in the `defaults()` getter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What properties should be added to the application config is defined in the `defaults()` getter.
```

Reviewer 2: The wording for this sentence seems off

Author: ```suggestion
Which properties are added to the application config by the plugin is defined in the `defaults()` getter.
```

Better like this?

Author: ```suggestion
The `defaults()` getter defines which properties are added to the application config by the plugin.
```

Or this.

> For a better overview, create a new file `defaults.js` and define the schema for the configuration options here like in the example below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a better overview, create a new file `defaults.js` and define the schema for the configuration options here as in the example below:
```

> For a better overview, create a new file `defaults.js` and define the schema for the configuration options here as in the example below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a better overview, create a new file `defaults.js` and define the schema for the configuration options as shown in the example below:
```

.defaults.js
[source,js]
----
export const myConfig = {
    type: 'object',
    properties: {
        enable: {
            type: 'boolean',
        },
        myKey1: {
            type: 'integer',
            minimum: 1,
            maximum: 9999,
        },
        myKey2: {
            type: 'array',
            items: {
                type: 'string',
            },
        },
        myKey3: {
            type: 'object',
            properties: {
                myKey4: {
                    anyOf: [{ type: 'string' }, { type: 'boolean' }],
                },
                myKey5: {
                    type: 'array',
                },
            },
            required: ['myKey4'],
        },
      },
    required: ['enable', 'myKey1', 'myKey2'],
    default: {
        enable: true,
        myKey1: 5000,
        myKey2: ['127.0.0.1']
    },
}
----

> This defines that the configuration options for the plugin can be provided in the following way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This defines that the configuration options for the plugin can be provided in the following manner:
```

  plugins: {
    myPlugin: {
      enable: true,
      key1: 5000,
      key2: ['127.0.0.1'],
      key3: { // optional key
        key4: '*',
        key5: ['GET', 'POST', 'PUT']
      },
    }
  }
}
----

To make the configuration options available to the plugin, require the prepared configuration options into `my-plugin.js` and return it in the `default()` getter.

[source,js]
----
const { BasePlugin } = require('lisk-sdk');
const { myConfig } = require('./defaults');
const pJSON = require('../package.json');

class MyPlugin extends BasePlugin {
  static get alias() {
    return "MyPlugin";
  }

  static get info() {
    return {
      author: pJSON.author,
      version: pJSON.version,
      name: pJSON.name,
    };
  }

  get defaults() {
    return myConfig;
  }
}

module.exports = MyPlugin;
----

== Defining the plugin logic

The `load()` function of a plugin contains the plugin logic that is executed, when the plugin is initialized.

It can be used to retrieve, mutate, store and/or publish data in a specific way, depending on the purpose of the plugin.

The `unload()` method contains the logic that needs to be executed to unload the plugin correctly.

> The `channel`, which is available inside of the `load()` function, allows to access the xref:{url_rpc_endpoints}[] in order to subscribe to events or to invoke certain actions within the application, to retrieve the desired data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `channel`, which is available inside of the `load()` function, allows access to the xref:{url_rpc_endpoints}[] in order to subscribe to events or to invoke certain actions within the application, to retrieve the desired data.
```

In this example, we subscribe to the event `app:transaction:new`, which is published everytime a new transaction is added to the application.
Next, the transaction is decoded and checked for it's `moduleID` and `assetID`.
If the transaction is a register delegate transaction, the delegate name is saved under `this._latestDelegate` and a new event `myPlugin:newDelegate` is published, which is announcing the new delegate to the application.

Additionally, we subscribe to the event `app:block:new`, which is published everytime a new block is added to the blockchain.

> Next, the block is decoded and the timestamp of the block is pushed into the `_knownTimestamps` array.

Reviewer 2: what is the purpose of `_knownTimestamps`?

Author: it is a list of timestamps of the blocks that where added to the chain, while the plugin was active.

      if ( transaction.moduleID === 5 && transaction.assetID === 0 ) {
        this._latestDelegate = transaction.username;
        channel.publish('myPlugin:newDelegate', {
          name: transaction.username,
        });
      }
    });
    channel.subscribe('app:block:new', ({ data }) => {
      const decodedBlock = this.codec.decodeBlock(data.block);
      this._knownTimestamps.push(decodedBlock.header.timestamp);
      channel.publish('myPlugin:timestamp', { timestamp: decodedBlock.header.timestamp });
    });
  }

  async unload() {
    this._latestDelegate = undefined;
    this._knownTimestamps = [];
  }
}

module.exports = MyPlugin;
----

== Defining the plugin interfaces

Similar to modules, plugins expose `actions` and `events`, which are interfaces that allow other plugins or external services to interact with the plugin.

In this example, two events are added:

* `newDelegate`, which is published in the `load()` function, when a new delegate is registered in ther network.
* `timestamp`, which is published in the `load()` function, when a new block is added to the blockchain.

In addition, two actions are added:

> 

Reviewer 2: The purpose of this example plugin is a little bit confusing. It is storing the latest delegate and also storing the timestamps for each new block. Are they related somehow?

Author: The purpose is to give an example how to create a plugin, and I wanted to include common examples. Decoding blocks and transactions are both pretty common and relevant examples, that's why I included them here both. Do you maybe have other suggestions?

> * If `getKnownTimestamp` is invoked, it returns the list of timestamps of the blocks that where added to the chain, while the plugin was active.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If `getKnownTimestamp` is invoked, it returns the list of timestamps of the blocks that were added to the chain, while the plugin was active.
```

  }

  get events() {
    return ['newDelegate','timestamp'];
  }

  get actions() {
    return {
      getKnownTimestamp: () => this._knownTimestamps,
      getLatestDelegate: () => this._latestDelegate
    };
  }

  async load(channel) {
    this._api = await apiClient.createIPCClient('~/.lisk/my-app');

    channel.subscribe('app:transaction:new', (data) => {
      const txBuffer = Buffer.from(data.transaction, 'hex');
      const transaction = this._api.transaction.decode(txBuffer);
      if ( transaction.moduleID === 5 && transaction.assetID === 0 ) {
        this._latestDelegate = transaction.username;
        channel.publish('myPlugin:newDelegate', {
          name: transaction.username,
        });
      }
    });
    channel.subscribe('app:block:new', ({ data }) => {
      const decodedBlock = this.codec.decodeBlock(data.block);
      this._knownTimestamps.push(decodedBlock.header.timestamp);
      channel.publish('myPlugin:timestamp', { timestamp: decodedBlock.header.timestamp });
    });
  }

  async unload() {
    this._latestDelegate = undefined;
    this._knownTimestamps = [];
  }
}

module.exports = MyPlugin;
----

== Registering the plugin with the application

> The last thing needed to do is to register the newly created module in the application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, it is required to register the newly created module in the application:
```
